MUSEUM PITCH 

As the digitization of cultural objects is accelerated, museums and other cultural institutions face new challenges and opportunities concerning the archiving, analysis, visualization, and presentation of their collections, as well as the interaction with their visitors. The application of new technologies opens a perspective that exceeds IT expertise, encouraging the alliance between programming skills and a solid humanities education.

The project “Coding the Humanities” addresses this necessity, by offering a collaborative platform for public and private partners that are keen to explore new research perspectives and new forms of knowledge production. By providing an online learning and research platform, Coding the Humanities enables students and scholars to develop a unique skillset that allows them to understand and interact with the various technologically mediated objects that they are confronted with. On the other hand, museums, archives, libraries and other knowledge institutions can thus develop and apply at an early stage customized digital tools that fit their research and function, through collaborations with humanities students and researchers in a online and offline environment that facilitates such encounters.

Scientific foundations offer an increasing number of grants that aim to accelerate innovative processes in the creative industries and knowledge institutions. The goals of Coding the Humanities are in line with research agenda promoted by institutions like the European Research Council and the Dutch NWO. The platform will consist of online exercises, modules, discussion boards and a distributed repository that enables them to share, reuse and extend their coding projects. It offers practical assignments, theoretical discussions and critical reflection. This combination can improve the actual practice of humanities research as well as (the quantity and quality of) its output, and can eventually lead to the formation of new models of collaboration. 
